CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing Guide

Thank you for your interest in contributing to the jasonbrain.com website! This guide provides instructions for developers (both human and AI) to ensure consistency, quality, and alignment with the project's vision.

## Project Persona & Voice

The brand voice of Jason Brain is:
- **Experienced & Professional**: Reflects 30+ years of expertise.
- **Creative & Innovative**: Bridges technology and art.
- **Personable & Passionate**: Connects with the audience on a human level.

All new copy and content should align with this voice. When in doubt, refer to the existing text on the `index.html` and `readme.md` files. The tone is confident, inspiring, and slightly futuristic.

## Tech Stack
- **Frontend**: HTML5, CSS3, JavaScript (ES6+)
- **Contact Form**: Formspree
- **Blogs**: Blogger platform, with custom XML templates stored in the `blogger-templates/` directory.
- **Hosting**: Static site hosting (e.g., GitHub Pages, Netlify, Vercel)

## Development Workflow

1.  **Create a new branch**: All new features or fixes should be done in a separate branch.
    ```bash
    git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
    ```
2.  **Write clean code**: Follow the coding standards outlined below.
3.  **Update documentation**: If you add a new feature, update the `ROADMAP.md` or `CHANGELOG.md` as needed.
4.  **Submit a Pull Request**: Provide a clear description of the changes you've made.

## Coding Standards

### HTML
- Use semantic HTML5 tags (`<section>`, `<nav>`, `<header>`, `<footer>`, etc.).
- Ensure all images have descriptive `alt` attributes for accessibility and SEO.
- Use lazy loading (`loading="lazy"`) for off-screen images and iframes to improve performance.

### CSS
- Follow the existing BEM-like naming convention (e.g., `.contact-form-container`, `.package-feature-item`).
- Keep styles organized into logical sections with comments (e.g., `/* Top Navigation */`, `/* Contact Section */`).
- Use the CSS variables defined in `:root` for all colors and fonts to maintain consistency with `STYLE_GUIDE.md`.
- Prioritize mobile-first responsive design. Use `@media (max-width: ...)` for adjustments on smaller screens.

### JavaScript
- Write clean, modern JavaScript (ES6+).
- Ensure all shared, custom scripts are placed in the root `script.js` file.
- Add comments to explain complex logic.
- Ensure any new interactive elements are accessible via keyboard.

### Commit Messages

Follow the Conventional Commits specification. This helps in automating changelogs and understanding the history.
- `feat:` (a new feature)
- `fix:` (a bug fix)
- `docs:` (changes to documentation)
- `style:` (code formatting, white-space, etc.)
- `refactor:` (code changes that neither fix a bug nor add a feature)
- `perf:` (a code change that improves performance)

## Release Process

When preparing a new version for release (e.g., `v1.2.0`), follow these steps:

1.  **Update the Changelog**: Move all items from the `[Unreleased]` section of `CHANGELOG.md` to a new version heading (e.g., `[1.2.0] - YYYY-MM-DD`).
2.  **Create a Release Description**: Create a new markdown file named after the version (e.g., `v1.2.0.md`). This file should summarize the key changes, new features, and bug fixes included in the release. Use previous release descriptions as a template.
3.  **Tag the Release**: Once the changes are merged into the main branch, create a new Git tag for the version.
    ```bash
    git tag -a v1.2.0 -m "Release v1.2.0"
    git push origin v1.2.0
    ```
4.  **Create GitHub Release**: Use the content from the release description markdown file to create a new release on GitHub, attaching the tag you just created.

Commit message:

v1.2.0: Server-Side Architecture & Blog Foundation
# Release v1.2.0: Server-Side Architecture & Blog Foundation

This release marks a significant evolution of the site's backend architecture, moving from a static, JavaScript-driven component model to a more robust and maintainable PHP-based structure. This version also establishes the foundational work for brand-aligned blog templates.

---

## Key Changes

### 🚀 Architectural Overhaul (PHP Implementation)
- **Server-Side Includes**: All pages have been converted from `.html` to `.php` to leverage server-side includes. The previous JavaScript-based method for loading the navigation and footer has been replaced with `<?php include '...'; ?>`, improving performance and reliability.
- **Self-Hosted Contact Form**: The dependency on the third-party Formspree service has been removed. A new self-hosted PHP script now securely handles all contact form submissions.

### 📝 Blog Template Development
- **Custom Blogger Template**: A new custom Blogger XML template (`blogger-template.xml`) has been created and refined.
- **Style Guide Alignment**: The template has been refactored to use the project's official CSS variables, ensuring the blogs' visual identity perfectly matches the main website.

### ✨ Site & Content Enhancements
- **New Pages**: Dedicated `/about/` and `/contact/` pages have been created, improving site structure and user navigation.
- **Standardized Footer**: A reusable `footer.html` component has been implemented across the entire site for consistency.

---

## Looking Forward

With the backend architecture now solidified on PHP and the blog template ready for deployment, the project is well-positioned to focus on the next set of goals from the roadmap, including the "Performance & Accessibility Pass" and content population for the blogs.

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing Guide

Thank you for your interest in contributing to the jasonbrain.com website! This guide provides instructions for developers (both human and AI) to ensure consistency, quality, and alignment with the project's vision.

## Project Persona & Voice

The brand voice of Jason Brain is:
- **Experienced & Professional**: Reflects 30+ years of expertise.
- **Creative & Innovative**: Bridges technology and art.
- **Personable & Passionate**: Connects with the audience on a human level.

All new copy and content should align with this voice. When in doubt, refer to the existing text on the `index.html` and `readme.md` files. The tone is confident, inspiring, and slightly futuristic.

## Tech Stack
- **Frontend**: HTML5, CSS3, JavaScript (ES6+)
- **Backend**: PHP (v8.4 on production)
- **Database**: MySQL
- **Contact Form**: Self-hosted PHP script
- **Blogs**: Blogger platform, with custom XML templates stored in the `blogger-templates/` directory.
- **Hosting**: PHP-enabled hosting (e.g., cPanel)

## Development Workflow

1.  **Initial Setup**: Before starting, copy the `config-sample.php` file to a new file named `config.php`. Update `config.php` with your local environment details (e.g., a test email address). This file is ignored by Git and is required for features like the contact form to work.
    ```bash
    cp config-sample.php config.php
    ```
1.  **Create a new branch**: All new features or fixes should be done in a separate branch.
    ```bash
    git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
    ```
2.  **Write clean code**: Follow the coding standards outlined below.
3.  **Update documentation**: If you add a new feature, update the `ROADMAP.md` or `CHANGELOG.md` as needed.
4.  **Submit a Pull Request**: Provide a clear description of the changes you've made.

## Coding Standards

### Site Architecture
- **Multi-Page Structure**: The site is moving from a single-page, anchor-link-heavy design to a more robust multi-page architecture. New top-level sections (like "About" or "Contact") should be created in their own subdirectories (e.g., `/about/`, `/contact/`) with an `index.php` file. This improves SEO, maintainability, and user navigation.
- **Descriptive URLs**: Directory names should be lowercase, hyphenated, and descriptive of the page's content (e.g., `music-production`). This creates clean, SEO-friendly URLs.
- **Reusable Components**: Core repeating elements like the navigation and footer are managed as PHP includes (`nav.html`, `footer.html`). All new pages should use these includes to ensure consistency.
  - `<?php include '../nav.html'; ?>`
  - `<?php include '../footer.html'; ?>`
- **Sitemap**: Whenever a new page is added or an existing one is removed, the `sitemap.xml` file in the root directory must be updated to reflect the change. This is crucial for SEO and ensuring search engines can find all content.
- **Internal Linking**: When relevant, add contextual links within page content to other pages on the site. This helps users discover more content and signals the relationship between pages to search engines.

### HTML
- Use semantic HTML5 tags (`<section>`, `<nav>`, `<header>`, `<footer>`, etc.).
- **Page Metadata**: Every page must have a unique and descriptive:
  - `<title>` tag (e.g., "Wedding DJ Services in Haliburton | Jason Brain").
  - `<meta name="description">` tag that summarizes the page content (approx. 150-160 characters).
- Ensure all images have descriptive `alt` attributes for accessibility and SEO.
- Use lazy loading (`loading="lazy"`) for off-screen images and iframes to improve performance.
- **Structured Data**: Use Schema.org structured data (via JSON-LD script) to help search engines understand the page's content. Refer to `contact/index.php` for an example of `ContactPage` schema.

### CSS
- Follow the existing BEM-like naming convention (e.g., `.contact-form-container`, `.package-feature-item`).
- Keep styles organized into logical sections with comments (e.g., `/* Top Navigation */`, `/* Contact Section */`).
- Use the CSS variables defined in `:root` for all colors and fonts to maintain consistency with `STYLE_GUIDE.md`.
- Prioritize mobile-first responsive design. Use `@media (max-width: ...)` for adjustments on smaller screens.

### JavaScript
- Write clean, modern JavaScript (ES6+).
- Ensure all shared, custom scripts are placed in the root `script.js` file.
- Add comments to explain complex logic.
- Ensure any new interactive elements are accessible via keyboard.

### Commit Messages

Follow the Conventional Commits specification. This helps in automating changelogs and understanding the history.
- `feat:` (a new feature)
- `fix:` (a bug fix)
- `docs:` (changes to documentation)
- `style:` (code formatting, white-space, etc.)
- `refactor:` (code changes that neither fix a bug nor add a feature)
- `perf:` (a code change that improves performance)

## Release Process

When preparing a new version for release (e.g., `v1.2.0`), follow these steps:

1.  **Update the Changelog**: Move all items from the `[Unreleased]` section of `CHANGELOG.md` to a new version heading (e.g., `[1.2.0] - YYYY-MM-DD`).
2.  **Create a Release Description**: Create a new markdown file named after the version (e.g., `v1.2.0.md`). This file should summarize the key changes, new features, and bug fixes included in the release. Use previous release descriptions as a template.
3.  **Tag the Release**: Once the changes are merged into the main branch, create a new Git tag for the version.
    ```bash
    git tag -a v1.2.0 -m "Release v1.2.0"
    git push origin v1.2.0
    ```
4.  **Create GitHub Release**: Use the content from the release description markdown file to create a new release on GitHub, attaching the tag you just created.
